# Stochastic Dynamics
Stochastic dynamics studies the behaviour of buildings and systems and their changes over time when they are affected by random processes, or also called stochastic processes, such as earthquakes or wind loads. Random processes, or also called stochastic processes, are characterised by an inherent randomness which can not be described deterministically[li2009sdos](@cite). To study the frequency distribution and their amplitude of a stochastic process, the so-called power spectral density (PSD) function can be defined.

## Semi-empirical PSD functions
Semi-empirical PSD functions describe the distribution of power across frequencies, combining theoretical models with experimental data for improved accuracy. Well established models in earthquake engineering are, for instance, the Kanai-Tajimi PSD model[kanai1957semi,tajimi1960statistical](@cite) or the Clough-Penzien PSD model[clough1975structures](@cite). The Clough-Penzien PSD model $S^{CP}$ with frequency vector $\omega$ reads as follows
```math
    S^{CP}(\omega, S_0, \omega_{f}, \zeta_{f}, \omega_{g}, \zeta_{g}) = S_0 \cdot \frac{{\omega^4}}{{(\omega_{f}^2-\omega^2)^2+4  \zeta_{f}^2  \omega_{f}^2  \omega^2}} \cdot \frac{{\omega_{g}^4+4  \zeta_{g}^2  \omega_{g}^2  \omega^2}}{{(\omega_{g}^2-\omega^2)^2+4  \zeta_{g}^2  \omega_{g}^2  \omega^2}},
```
where the parameters $S_0$, $\omega_{f}$, $\zeta_{f}$, $\omega_{g}$ and $\zeta_{g}$ characterizing soil conditions.


## Stochastic Process Generation
The spectral representation method (SRM)[shinozuka1991simulation](@cite) can be utilised to generate realisations of stochastic processes $x(t)$ which are carrying the characteristics of a PSD function $S(\omega)$ in time domain. The stochastic character of these processes is represented by random variables $\varphi$. The spectral representation method reads as follows
```math
    x(t) = \sqrt{2} \sum \limits_{n=0}^{N_{\omega}-1}\sqrt{2 S(\omega_n) \Delta \omega} \cos(\omega_n t + \varphi),
```
where $\Delta \omega$ is the frequency increment, $\omega_n$ is the frequency at coordinate $n$, $t$ is the time vector and $N_{\omega}$ is the total number of frequency points.

Stochastic processes generated by SRM can be utilised in a Monte Carlo framework, for instance, in order to determine the structural reliability or other quantities of interest.

## PSD estimation
If a time signal, such as an earthquake, is given and the time domain and shall be studied for their characteristics in frequency domain, the PSD estimation can be carried out. Although rigorous mathematical relationships between stochastic processes and the PSD function exist, estimation techniques are often necessary since exact determination would require continuous signals of infinite length, which are not practical in real-world applications.

A frequently used estimator of the stationary PSD function from time records is the periodogram[li2009sdos](@cite). To transform a stationary stochastic process from time domain to frequency domain, the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) can be utilised. The periodogram is the squared absolute value of the DFT of the discrete time signal $x$ with data point index $n$, such as
```math
    \hat{S}_X(\omega_k) = \frac{\Delta t^2}{T} \left| \sum \limits_{n = 0}^{N_t-1} x_n e^{-2 \pi i k n / N} \right|^2,
```
where $\Delta t$ is the time discretisation, $T$ is duration of the record, $N_t$ is the total number of data points, $i$ is the imaginary unit and $k$ is the integer frequency for $\omega_k = \frac{2 \pi k}{T}$.
